---
layout: default
title: "Tournament Guidelines"
nav_order: 4
parent: Tournament
grand_parent: Original Rules
search_exclude: false
permalink: /original/tournament/metw-tournament-guidelines/
---

<details>
<summary>Sources and Citations</summary>
<ul>
<li>METW Companion</li>
</ul>
</details>

# Middle-earth<br>The Wizards Companion

{: .text-center}
## PART VII<br>TOURNAMENT GUIDELINES

As of January 1996, _Middle-earth: The Wizards_ is too new of a game to have "solid" tournament rules. Over the course of the next six months, comments and suggestions will be gathered and an official body (The Council of Lórien) will be formed to provide specific rules for playing _Middle-earth: The Wizards_ in tournaments. In the meantime, this article will provide some guidelines for running tournament events for _Middle-earth: The Wizards_. For purposes of discussion, this article uses standard tournament terminology: brackets, single elimination, double elimination, and swiss system.

{: .note }
> **Note:** Usually, in a "swiss system," players with similar records play each other every round. Records are based upon a running tally of the number of points received for each match (e.g., 2 for a victory, 1 for a tie, 0 for a lose). There are usually a preset number of rounds, with the overall victor being the player with the most points.

When getting ready to run a _Middle-earth: The Wizards_ tournament, a tournament coordinator must be appointed. This person will be responsible for all the logistics of running the tournament. When reviewing the suggestions of this article, a tournament coordinator should consider the following questions:
 - How many people will be in the tournament? (16 or fewer, 17 to 32, 33 to 64, over 64)
 - What degree of familiarity will the players have with _Middle-earth: The Wizards_? (no experience, intermediate experience, extensive experience)
 - What tournament format is desirable? (sealed deck, scenario, standard, etc.)
 - How much time is allotted for the tournament (i.e., what time limit needs to be chosen for each round)?

### RULES FOR RANDOM VALUES

In all tournaments, all random values will be generated by using two six-sided dice. Players will never be allowed to use their cards to generate random values.

### RULES FOR STARTING CHARACTERS

Regardless of the tournament format desired the tournament coordinator should use the following guidelines for revealing starting characters:
 - Players should select up to 10 characters to put into a pool of potential starting characters (remember that this happens before selecting your characters for your play deck). Players should simultaneously reveal their first choice for a starting character. If this character is duplicated, both characters are set aside (this character may not appear in either starting company). Each player should then select a second character to reveal (and he may not select a character that has already been revealed). Any unduplicated characters revealed go into his player's starting company. This process continues until one of the following occurs: the player has 5 characters in his company, the total Mind stats for all that player's starting characters is 20, the player has exhausted his pool of 10 potential starting characters, or the player decides to stop revealing characters (i.e., he is satisfied with his starting company). Note that when one player stops, the
other player continues the process until one of the four conditions is met.<br>In his play deck, each player may now assign up to 10 characters, and this may include any duplicated characters from his pool of starting characters.

Allowing players to introduce characters in this fashion minimizes matches where each played starts with very few characters because of multiple duplications.

### PRIZES
Each of the formats discussed below will have suggestions on how to award prizes. These suggestions will be in terms of "prize-units." A prize-unit should be defined by the tournament coordinator and could be anything from gift certificates, to starter decks, to booster packs, etc.

### THE SUGGESTED STANDARD TOURNAMENT

The suggested standard tournament is a modified single-elimination format. The modified single-elimination format requires any even number of players to pair off and play one match for the first round. Losers from the first round of play are placed in the Silver Bracket and winners from the first round are placed in the Gold Bracket. Each bracket (Gold and Silver) then plays single elimination. Byes are awarded after the first round within each bracket if necessary.

The modified single-elimination format has the advantage of allowing each player to play at least two matches without adding more rounds to the tournament than a single elimination format. Brackets are deterministic and simple to display.

In the Standard Tournament format, it is suggested that all players play one-deck games (each game lasting less than an hour) . In the Gold Bracket, it is suggested that the players in the semi-final and final matches play two-deck games. In the Silver Bracket two-deck games are suggested for the final match. 

Note that players in the two-deck games should be given the opportunity to revise the composition of their decks. This is an exception to the rest of the tournament (as players should not change the composition of their decks during the tournament). The two-deck game would be good for an entire tournaent if the coordinator feels he can allow enough time for all games (approximatley one and a half hours for each match would be required).

Pnzes should be awarded as follows: 1 prize-unit to the losing Gold Bracket semi-finalists and to the Silver Bracket runner up, 2 prize-units to the Gold Bracket runner up and to the Silver Bracket winner and 3 prize-units to the Gold Bracket winner. Note that this requires a total of 10 prize-units for all prizes.

### SCENARIO TOURNAMENTS

It is highly recommended that Resource/Character Scenarios be considered by any tournament coordinator who has the means of communicating to all Participants in advance what the pool of scenarios will be for his tournament. It is suggested that a coordinator post (in advance) three Resource/Character Scenarios that will be valid for the tournament. Participants will come to the tournament with decks tuned for their chosen scenarios.

Using the modified single-elimination format, participants will be playing to complete their scenario instead of playing for the Free Council (as presented in the rules). Within this framework, after starting characters are revealed, each player must announce to his opponent which scenario he has chosen. His opponent would then know what victory conditions
his opponent is trying to achieve.

Encompassing Scenarios can also be used in a tournament setting. However, Encompassing Scenarios are more difficult to run as tournaments because most of the scenarios are intended to be played without time limits. If time limits are imposed on this type of scenario, it may become too easy to abuse the scenario rules. 

A coordinator can select these scenarios from _The Companion_, magazines, from sources containing _Middle-earth: The Wizards_ information, or use Resource/Character Scenarios he has created himself. After January 1996, the official sanctioning body for _Middle-earth: The Wizards_ (The Council of Lórien) may be contacted and official scenarios will be given to sanctioned tournaments.


### TIME LIMITS ON MATCHES

With _Middle-earth: The Wizards_, there can be great variation in the length of time it takes to play a single game. For a tournament, it is essential that a time limit be established to ensure a reasonable flow for
the tournament. For a one-deck format, it is suggested that the Free Counctl be automatically called after
40 minutes. When 40 minutes has elapsed (as announced by a timer), the player who currently is taking
his turn finishes his turn. If his opponent did not have the first turn, his opponent then takes one final
turn (i.e., both players get the same number of turns). The Free Council starts after the opponent's turn.

For a two-deck game, it is suggested that the Free Council be automatically called after 1 hour 15 minutes. For a three-deck game, it is suggested that the Free Council be automatically called after 2 hours. For a campaign game (a four-deck game), it is suggested that the Free Council be automatically called after 3 hours.

For a Resource/Character Scenario format tournament, it is suggested that time be called after one hour. At this point, the player who currently is taking his turn finishes his turn. If his opponent did not have the first turn, his opponent then takes one final turn (i .e., both players get the same number of turns). Assuming that in the interim no player has achieved the conditions for victory for his chosen scenario, the victor is the player who has achieved the higest "rank" as indicated by the specific scenario. 

For an Encompassing Scenario tournament, the coordinator would need to assess a time limit based on the nature of the encompassing scenario. Most Encompassing Scenarios should be allowed to play out without a time limit.

### BREAKING TIES IN STANDARD TOURNAMENT MATCHES

In an elimination format (as opposed to swiss format), a method of breaking ties must be established. We suggest the "weakest link" method be used. If each player's Wizard is eliminated by the corruption checks made prior to the Free Council, this tie is broken with a dice roll---highest roll wins. If both players have an equal number of marshalling points after the Free Council has resolved (i.e., there is a tie), add one corruption point to each non-Wizard character in play and each character must make another corruption check. Marshalling points are recounted and victory is awarded to the player with the most marshalling points. If there is still a tie, add one more corruption point to each non-Wizard character and make another set of corruption checks. Again, assess marshalling points to see if a victor emerges. If not, continue adding one corruption point, making corruption checks, and reassessing marshalling points until a victor emerges. If, in the unlikely event, all non-Wizard characters in play are corrupted away by the weakest link method, and there is still a tie, then each player rolls dice to determine a victor---highest roll wins.

Note that this method simulates who will most likely fail in the final struggle against Sauron. The characters are not actually getting corrupted at the Free Council. Instead, the Free Council is "peering into the heart and soul" of each character and assessing him.

{: .note }
> A swiss format assigns points after every game (wins are worth 1 point, losses are worth O points, and ties are worth half a point). Players continue to play until there is an obvious victor. Thus, no tie-breaking method need be established.

### BREAKING TIES IN RESOURCE/CHARACTER SCENARIO TOURNAMENT MATCHES

If both players have achieved the same "rank" as indicated by the specific scenario, each player rolls the dice. Rerolling ties, the player who rolls highest has the option of taking another turn or of forcing his opponent to take another turn. After this turn is completed, each player's rank is reassessed. If no victor has emerged, continue determining who will take further turns and execute these until a victor does emerge. If at any point a player achieves the conditions for victory for his chosen scenario, he wins automatically.

### SEALED DECK TOURNAMENTS

For a Sealed Deck Tournament, each player is given a starter deck and two booster packs. He is allowed 45 minutes to tune a deck for a one-deck game format. Any bracket system can be used, but the modified single-elimination format suggested above or a swiss format seems to be the most enjoyable. It should be noted that on average, seven cards from each sealed deck of cards will not be playable at all. players should be aware of this extra baggage when tuning. If a player does not have 25 playable hazards or resources, he should play with all that he does have, but still play with a minimum of 25 of the other.

### TOURNAMENTS FOR INEXPERIENCED PLAYERS

The suggested format of a tournament for inexpenenced players is a Sealed Deck Tournament (as this format requires the fewest decisions be made when tuning). Because the learning curve for _Middle-earth: The Wizards_ is not small, it is suggested that a coordinator make the starter decks available to the novice at least one day prior to the event (so that players will have the opportunity to absorb the rules and to consider their cards closely). Having novice players play in demo games with their starter decks prior to the tournament is a very efficient method of preparation.

Tournaments for novice players should use only the starter rules (e.g., Region cards should be considered useless). When the players arrive at the tournament, distribute the two booster packs to each player and allow players 45 minutes to tune according to the sealed deck suggestions above.

Rules violations will probably occur with the novice tournaments. It is suggested that these violations not be policed or worried about until a player involved notes it. At that point in the game, the correct rule should be adopted, but all previous violations should not be amended for. For example, if a player chooses _Sting_ (a unique minor item) for his starting company, and his opponent notices after the first turn of the game that unique minor items may not be chosen for starting companies, do not replace _Sting_ at this point. If the opponent noticed the violation before either player has taken his first turn, the player should replace _Sting_ with a non-unique minor item. A coordinator and staff should be prepared to answer questions in such a way that all participants in the tournament can hear answer (this may require repeating the question for all to hear).
